Unpaired Image Translation to Mitigate Domain
Shift in Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber
Detector Responses
Yi Huang, Dmitrii Torbunov, Brett Viren, Haiwang Yu, Jin
Huang, Meifeng Lin, Yihui Ren‡
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA
{yhuang2,dtorbunov,bviren,hyu,jhuang,mlin,yren}@bnl.gov
Abstract.
Deep learning algorithms often are developed and trained on a training dataset
and deployed on test datasets. Any systematic difference between the training and
a test dataset may severely degrade the final algorithm performance on the test
dataset—what is known as the domain shift problem . This issue is prevalent in many
scientific domains where algorithms are trained on simulated data but applied to
real-world datasets. Typically, the domain shift problem is solved through various
domain adaptation methods. However, these methods are often tailored for a specific
downstream task, such as classification or semantic segmentation, and may not easily
generalize to different tasks. This work explores the feasibility of using an alternative
way to solve the domain shift problem that is not specific to any downstream algorithm.
The proposed approach relies on modern Unpaired Image-to-Image (UI2I) translation
techniques, designed to find translations between different image domains in a fully
unsupervised fashion. In this study, the approach is applied to a domain shift problem
commonly encountered in Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber (LArTPC) detector
research when seeking a way to translate samples between two differently distributed
LArTPC detector datasets deterministically. This translation allows for mapping real-
world data into the simulated data domain where the downstream algorithms can be
run with much less domain-shift-related performance degradation. Conversely, using
the translation from the simulated data to a real-world domain can increase the realism
of the simulated dataset and reduce the magnitude of any systematic uncertainties.
To evaluate the quality of the translations, we use both pixel-wise metrics and a
downstream task to measure the effectiveness of UI2I methods for mitigating the
domain shift problem. We adapted several popular UI2I translation algorithms to work
on scientific data and demonstrated the viability of these techniques for solving the
domain shift problem with LArTPC detector data. To facilitate further development of
domain adaptation techniques for scientific datasets, the “Simple Liquid-Argon Track
Samples” (SLATS) dataset used in this study is also published.
‡ corresponding author. Email: yren@bnl.gov.
arXiv:2304.12858v4  [hep-ex]  10 Oct 2024

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 2
photographic images
scientific data
Domain A Domain B
: Neural translator
Figure 1. Learning to translate without pairing. An unpaired translation
problem features two domains with samples that are not paired, e.g., cats and dogs.
For an input image from the source domain, a neural translation algorithm needs
to produce translations resembling samples in the target domain. In the meantime,
the translations must retain certain consistency with their input. The first row
demonstrates that a deep neural network model can be trained to translate cats
into lifelike yet nonexistent dogs while maintaining features such as fur color patterns
and facial orientations. Our work investigates if UI2I translation can be adapted to
translate between two domains of LArTPC images.
1. Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) methods are finding widespread and unprecedented applications
in multiple areas of science and technology. Constructing supervised DL models
requires access to large volumes of properly labeled, high-quality real-world data.
However, labeling real-world scientific data is often difficult, costly, or otherwise
impossible [1, 2, 3, 4]. To workaround the issue, many scientific domains resort to
using simulation as a means of obtaining large quantities of labeled data. Although this
approach solves the lack of labeled data problem, it introduces another challenge. As
there often exists systematic differences between the simulated and real-world data, a
DL algorithm trained on a simulated dataset can exhibit degraded performance when it
is applied to real-world data. This issue is known as the domain shift problem [5, 1, 6, 7].
In this work, we consider tackling the typical domain shift problem in Liquid Argon
Time Projection Chamber (LArTPC) detector research. LArTPC is a particle tracking
and calorimetry detector technology [8, 9, 10] that forms the basis for detectors used
by experiments such as MicroBooNE [11], ProtoDUNE [12], and the next-generation
DUNE [13]. As with other detector technologies, obtaining human labels for real-
world detector data is prohibitively costly. Therefore, physicists rely on scientific

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 3
detector simulations to generate labeled data and develop analysis algorithms. While
the manually designed analysis algorithms are continuously tested to ensure they are
minimally affected by the domain shift problem, domain shift remains a serious concern
for DL algorithms. It has sparked numerous debates, significantly slowed adoption of DL
methods to LArTPC detector analysis, and driven the search for alternative solutions.
Typically, the domain shift problem is solved using various domain adaptation
(DA) algorithms [14, 7, 1, 15]. DA techniques are created to enable DL algorithms
to perform effectively on novel domains distinct from those where they are trained.
However, LArTPC data analysis workflows make it difficult to apply traditional DA
techniques. The primary obstacle is that state-of-the-art DA methods [16, 17, 18] are
tightly coupled to a specific downstream task affected by the domain shift problem.
LArTPC data analysis chains can employ dozens of different reconstruction algorithms
possibly affected by the domain shift. This requires developing and testing dozens more
DA methods, i.e., one for each downstream algorithm. Moreover, new LArTPC data
analysis algorithms are constantly being developed, which requires designing even more
new DA methods. Thus, it is not feasible to directly apply the traditional DA approaches
to LArTPC data analysis.
Here, we consider the viability of using Unpaired Image-to-Image (UI2I) translation
methods to address the domain shift problem on LArTPC data. UI2I translation
methods are developed for finding translations between different domains of images
in a fully unsupervised way [19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. For instance, the top row of Figure 1
illustrates the operation of a UI2I translation algorithm for the cat-to-dog translation.
In the training phase, a UI2I translation algorithm receives random images from the
two domains: cats and dogs. Notably, the UI2I translation algorithm is not given what
exactly the correct translation of a particular cat should look like. Thus, the algorithm
is called “unpaired.” Instead, the algorithm attempts to find some common “content”
between the two domains and learns to perform a cat-to-dog translation while preserving
the “content.” Once the algorithm is trained, it can transform an arbitrary image of a
cat into an image of a dog where the original cat and generated dog are related on some
fundamental level (share the same “content”).
The key question we try to answer is whether the UI2I translation methods are
capable of learning the proper “content” and finding the “correct” translation between
two domains of LArTPC data: domain A representing simulation and domain B
denoting the real-world data. This question is nontrivial as there is an infinite number
of possible translations between the two domains mathematically, while only a small
fraction of them is correct. The UI2I translation literature frequently overlooks the
question of whether or not the image content is preserved during the translation or relies
on subjective measures of the content [24]. Applying the UI2I translation methods to
scientific data requires much stronger guarantees of the translation’s correctness. In this
work, we investigate the ability of several UI2I translation models to learn the LArTPC
translations and compare their performance.
If the UI2I translation methods are capable of finding the correct translations

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 4
between the data domains, then the B→ A translation can be used for DA purposes.
For instance, if an algorithm ϕ is trained on the A domain and applied to an image b
from the B domain, the domain shift problem would manifest. However, if image b is
first translated toward the domain A with the help of a UI2I translation algorithm, ϕ
can be applied on the translated image, mitigating domain shift effects.
On the other hand, the correct A→ B translation can be used to enhance the
realism of the simulated data. Performing such a translation on a simulated A dataset
will produce a more realistic B′ dataset, which has several potential applications:
• It can be used to increase the fidelity of the simulation for the subsequent data
analysis.
• LArTPC analysis algorithms can be developed on the translated B′ data instead of
the original simulated A data. This has the potential to make the algorithms less
affected by the domain shift effects.
• TheB′ dataset is produced from A by a UI2I translation algorithm. Therefore, for
each b′ in B′, we know its source image a in A. Comparing b′ to its source a will
allow for directly observing systematic differences between the simulation and real-
world data on a sample-by-sample basis. Without such an A→B correspondence,
scientists can only observe systematic differences by comparing averages over the
entire dataset.
• Likewise, an A→ B pairing can be used to estimate the sensitivity of various
downstream algorithmsϕ to the systematic differences between the simulation and
real-world data by computing ϕ(a)−ϕ(b′).
Unfortunately, it is difficult to evaluate UI2I translation methods on real data. For
this to be possible, for each real detector data image, a matching simulation image
should be generated with the same physics. Afterwards, the simulated image would be
translated to see if the outcome matches the matching real image. However, extracting
the physics ground truth, such as particle momentum, from real-world LArTPC data
requires meticulous and time-consuming analysis from a large scientific collaboration.
Thus, we consider a surrogate problem, where both A and B domains are populated
by the simulated data with controllable differences between the domains . Using the
simulation will allow for making accurate judgments about the translation quality.
For this study, we created the Simple Liquid-Argon Track Samples (SLATS) dataset
featuring two domains: A and B. The A domain is populated by a LArTPC detector
simulation with a simplified version of the detector response to the particle activity
within it. The B domain is populated by a LArTPC detector simulation with a more
realistic version of the detector response. Incorrect simulation of the detector response
is a known source of systematic errors in the LArTPC detector analysis. Thus, the
SLATS dataset illustrates a common source of the domain shift problem encountered
in LArTPC detector research. To facilitate the accurate evaluation of the translation’s
accuracy, the test portion of the SLATS dataset has an explicit pairing between the A

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 5
andB domains. That is, for each test image in the A domain, we know exactly how its
translation should appear in the B domain and vice versa.
We evaluate the correctness of the resulting UI2I translations via three methods.
First, we use the explicit pairing of the test part of the SLATS dataset to perform
pixel-wise comparisons of the translated images to their ground truth. Second, we rely
on a downstream production-grade signal processing algorithm to extract the physical
content of the images. This algorithm is especially sensitive to the domain shift problem.
Finally, we study whether the UI2I methods can improve the performance of a supervised
DL algorithm affected by the domain shift on the SLATS dataset.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly describe
how a LArTPC detector works and the construction of the SLATS dataset. In Section 3,
we review a selection of UI2I translation algorithms suitable for LArTPC data. In
Section 4, we evaluate the quality of translated images. Finally, in the discussion section,
we summarize our findings and suggest future directions of research.
Main Contributions
• We show the feasibility of using UI2I translation techniques to perform domain
translation on LArTPC data. The four UI2I translation algorithms studied in this
work manage to correctly capture the “content” of the data and preserve it during
the domain translation.
• We demonstrate that UI2I translation techniques can be used to reliably mitigate
the domain shift effects on LArTPC data and can provide up to 80% reduction in
domain shift error of a downstream signal processing algorithm.
• Likewise, we show that UI2I translation methods can be used to improve the
realism of the LArTPC simulation, suggesting the viability of using UI2I translation
methods as a post-processing step to obtain a more realistic simulation.
• We release a SLATS dataset demonstrating the common source of the LArTPC
detector domain shift in a controllable manner. The dataset also displays unique
features of scientific datasets not commonly shared by natural images, such as signal
sparsity, lack of upper/lower limits on pixel values, and exact knowledge of the
correct translations. This dataset is expected to help with the future development
of additional scientifically sound domain translation algorithms.
• Finally, we compare the translation performance of four UI2I translation methods
(CycleGAN [20], ACL-GAN [22], U-GAT-IT [23], UVCGAN [21]) on the SLATS
dataset. Our results demonstrate that the UVCGAN algorithm significantly
outperforms other methods across a wide range of metrics, and introduces the least
amount of artifacts into the translated data. These results suggest that UVCGAN
may serve as an effective basis for further development of UI2I translation methods
in scientific data processing.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 6
Cathode 
Plane
Edrift 
U V Y
Liquid Argon TPC
Y wire plane waveforms
V wire plane waveforms
Sense Wires
t
Incoming Neutrino
Charged Particles
Figure 2. Signal formation in a three-wire plane LArTPC. An illustration
from [25]. LArTPC detectors enclose a volume of liquid argon. Energetic charged
particles ionize electrons from nearby argon atoms as they pass through the volume.
An external electric field causes the electrons to drift toward the detector’s readout.
The readout consists of three parallel planes of sense wires. Each wire plane generates
one tomographic view of the tracks. The 3D particle tracks can then be reconstructed
by combining the three tomographic views.
2. The two-domain SLATS dataset
Released with this study, the SLATS dataset has two domains, each populated by a
variant of a LArTPC detector simulation used in the ProtoDUNE-SP experiment [26,
27]. The two domains differ in precisely one feature—the response function. This section
discusses how the SLATS dataset is generated and preprocessed.
2.1. LArTPC overview
LArTPC detectors enclose a volume of liquid argon (Figure 2). Energetic charged
particles, like those produced from the interaction between a neutrino and an argon
nucleus, pass through the volume. As they move, these particles ionize electrons from
nearby argon atoms. An external electric field causes these electrons to drift through the
liquid argon toward the detector’s readout side. The readout of the detector comprises

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 7
⊗
⊗
A. ionization electron
distribution
time (µs)
40
20
0
−20
−40
2D response function
for domain B
time (µs)
40
20
0
−20
−40
quasi-1D response function
for domain A
B. field response function
 C. ADC waveform
Figure 3. Response functions and ADC waveforms. The ionization electron
distribution (Panel A) is convolved with two types of response functions to produce
the SLATS dataset’s two domains. The 2D response (Panel B top) is used to produce
domain B samples, while the quasi-1D response (Panel B bottom) is used to create
domain A samples. The quasi-1D data are constructed by masking the 2D response
so all contributions from neighboring wires are removed. Panel C shows examples of
the ADC waveforms used as input to the translation algorithm.
three parallel planes (U, V, and Y) of parallel sense wires, oriented in complementary
directions. Each wire plane generates a readout, called an ADC waveform, that can be
interpreted as one tomographic view of the particle’s tracks. A tomographic view is a
two-dimensional (2D) image with one dimension in space and the other in time. When
the three tomographic views are combined, the three-dimensional (3D) tracks of the
energized charged particles can be reconstructed.
In this work, the images used to construct the SLATS dataset are the readout from
one wire plane (the U plane). The pixel value of the images is the digitized measure (or
ADC value) of the current induced by the ionized electrons. The measure is the result
of a convolution between the electron distribution and a detector response [28]. The
real detector response is a complex function of the electrostatic fields of all electrodes
in the detector’s readout. However, in simulation and signal processing, this response is
approximated by a simplified model. We call such an approximation aresponse function.
2.2. Two simulated domains
The two SLATS dataset domains, A and B, are generated by applying two different
response functions. More precisely, for a set of simulated simple particle tracks, a low-
fidelity quasi-one dimensional (1D) response function is applied to produce a domain A
waveform and a high-fidelity 2D response function to produce a domain B waveform.
The 2D model is state-of-the-art in the LArTPC community. The quasi-1D model is
an artificially simplified model obtained by masking all contributions from neighboring

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 8
A. full U-plane ADC waveform from domain B with center crops and tiling
channel
time
channel
time
B1. a domain A tile B2. a domain B tile
0 200 1000 2000
104
105
106
threshold
signal count
number of tiles
C. nonzero counts
A, 74% tiles
below 200
B, 72% tiles
below 200
Figure 4. Preprocessing for the SLATS dataset. Panel A features an example
of a full ADC waveform of the U plane from domainB (generated with a 2D response).
The full image has dimension (channel , time) = (800, 6000). The portion bounded by
the red box is the center crop of dimension (768 , 5888). The center crop is divided
into 3× 23 tiles of size (256 , 256) and shown as the gray grid. Panels B1 and B2
show a pair of tiles in the test dataset from the domain A (generated with a quasi-1D
response) and the domain B (generated with a 2D response), respectively. The tile in
B2 corresponds to the highlighted tile in Panel A. The distribution of the number of
nonzero pixels in the tiles is shown in Panel C. Tiles with less than 200 nonzero pixels
are discarded from the SLATS dataset.
wires in the 2D response (Figure 3). Additional information on response functions and
track generation can be found in Appendix A.1.
The SLATS dataset’s design was motivated by three considerations. First, in the
absence of real detector data, the contrast between the 2D model and the quasi-1D
model is a reasonable proxy for the systematic difference between the real detector
response and a simulated one. Second, using identical simulation conditions except for
response functions allows for generating paired test images. With the paired test images,
we can evaluate a UI2I translation algorithm by directly comparing a translated image
with its known target. Lastly, the restricted source of difference in the two domains
facilitates understanding of the capability (and/or potential limitations) of unpaired
neural translation. The experience gained via such a constructed scenario affords a
proper foundation for applying UI2I translation between domains with complex sources
of difference.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 9
2.3. Dataset preparation
This study focuses on one of the three sense wire planes, namely the U plane. Figure 4A
depicts a full U plane readout of dimension (channel , time) = (800, 6000). Because a
majority of existing neural translation algorithms take an input size of (256 , 256), we
use a center (768 , 5888) crop (red box) in the U plane image, and then divide it into
3× 23 non-overlapping tiles of size (256, 256).
Figure 4B1 and B2 show a pair of tiles from domains A and B. Two major
differences appear between them. First, the domain B track exhibits long-range
induction effects in both the time and space (channel) dimensions, while the A track
shows variation only in time. This leads to domain B tracks being less compact than
domain A. In particular, larger lobe structures can be observed at the end of domain
B tracks, while domain A tracks end more abruptly. This can also lead to features
in a domain B tile missing from the corresponding domain A tile, such as the small
red lobe between the two tracks. Second, domain B has a larger neighborhood where
the electron distribution can lead to interference patterns as evidenced by the red lobe
above the bottom track.
Because of the sparseness of events in the generation of SLATS, a majority of
(256, 256) tiles are fully or nearly empty. According to the distribution of the number
of nonzero pixels in the tiles (Figure 4C), we choose a threshold of 200 pixels (around
the first local minimum for domain A) and reject tiles below the threshold. To keep the
tiles paired for testing, we retain a pair in the test dataset if only both the A and B
tiles pass the threshold. More details about the preprocessing of LArTPC simulation
data for neural translator training can be found in Appendix A.2.
The SLATS dataset can be downloaded from https://zenodo.org/record/
7809108. The dataset contains both center crops and tiles. The dataset’s test part
is paired for pairwise translation quality evaluation.
3. Deep generative models for unpaired image translation
As previously outlined, our goal is to apply modern UI2I translation methods to mitigate
the domain shift problem. This section addresses the challenges in designing UI2I
translation algorithms and describes a family of UI2I translation methods suitable for
this task. The algorithms discussed herein are based on a Generative Neural Network
(GAN) architecture (Section 3.1) and rely on a cycle-consistency constraint (Section 3.2)
to ensure preservation of the important features during the translation.
3.1. GAN for UI2I
The first successful models for UI2I translation were built on top of the GAN
architecture [29]. GAN models are able to learn the particular data distribution and
synthesize new samples indistinguishable from the real data. Their main component is
a generator network G that produces realistic-looking data from random noise. To

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 10
a GA→B btran GB→A acyc
cycle-consistency loss
bGB→AatranGA→Bbcyc
cycle-consistency loss
DA DBa GB→A aidt
identity loss
b GB→A bidt
identity loss
generator losses
discriminator losses
Translation
Loss
Figure 5. Summary of the CycleGAN [20] model. CycleGAN consists of
two pairs of GANs, (GA→B,DB) and (GB→A,DA). The discriminators, DA andDB,
distinguish translations from real images, while the generators (or translators), GA→B
andGB→A, produce realistic translations that are consistent with the source images.
train the generator network G, GANs employ another neural network known as a
discriminatorD. In each GAN training iteration, the discriminator D network learns to
differentiate samples produced by the generator from the real-world data. Then, using
the discriminator as a guide, the generator G network is trained to produce samples
that are indistinguishable from the real-world data. In other words, the generator and
discriminator engage in a game, throughout which the generator progressively improves
the quality of the generated data.
3.2. Cycle-consistent GAN
As noted, GANs can be used to learn data distributions and produce realistic-looking
samples from random noise. This means, in principle, a GAN can be trained to generate
real detector data from simulated data. However, when a GAN generates a real detector
data sample from a simulated one, it is not guaranteed to preserve any information from
the input. The GAN can completely discard the simulated sample and produce a random
and unrelated output that looks like real detector data. This creates a challenge for our
LArTPC detector example as we need to generate not only realistic-looking real data
samples, but also ensure the generated samples preserve information from the simulated
ones. The same discussion also applies to the translation in the opposite direction.
One approach to address this is provided by CycleGAN [20], which employs two
GANs that work in the opposite directions as illustrated in Figure 5. By using a pair
of GANs, a CycleGAN-like model creates translation loops, so information loss during
translation can be properly measured.
Specifically, we denote the two domains by A and B and the corresponding GANs
as (GA→B,DB) and (GB→A,DA), respectively. Consider a source image a ∈ A. A
CycleGAN-like model can translate this sample to look like those from domain B by
using its generator GA→B. To ensure the generator GA→B preserves information about
the source image a, CycleGAN imposes a cycle-consistency constraint, requiring that

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 11
a cyclically translated image acyc ≡ GB→A(GA→B(a)) matches the original image a.
In practice, this constraint is enforced by the cycle-consistency loss ∥a−acyc∥ that
encourages the generatorsGA→B andGB→A to preserve the information. A similar loss
function is applied for the cyclic translation starting from b∈B.
In addition to the cycle-consistency loss, identity loss may be used to encourage the
generator to retain features from the source that are also present in the target domain.
For an image a∈A, the identity loss is defined as
a−aidt, where aidt≡G B→A(a). A
parallel formulation applies to domain B.
3.3. CycleGAN-like UI2I translation models
Here, we introduce three CycleGAN-like UI2I translation algorithms, ACL-GAN [22],
U-GAT-IT [23], and UVCGAN [21], with special emphasis on the UVCGAN, or U-Net
Vision-transformer Cycle-consistent GAN, because of its outstanding performance on
the SLATS dataset (see Section 4).
The motivation behind ACL-GAN is that the stringent pixel-wise cycle-consistency
loss may be a hurdle for generators to produce drastic changes such as large shape
changes or removing/adding large objects. To solve the problem, ACL-GAN replaces
strong cycle-consistency loss with a weaker adversarial consistency that does not require
the cyclically translated image to match the source exactly, merely to match the
distribution of the source images.
The authors of U-GAT-IT attack the problem of effective translation from another
angle, keeping the cycle/identity-consistency loss functions in their original form as
those in CycleGAN but renovating the generator and discriminator network structure.
They use the class attention map to guide the generators and discriminators to focus
on regions distinguishing between source and target domains. U-GAT-IT has achieved
outstanding performance in translation between selfie photos and anime characters,
which is a tough image translation task. One downside of U-GAT-IT is its model is
bulky and slow, which may limit its application to LArTPC research should throughput
and computing resources become pressing considerations.
Based on this work, the UVCGAN model performs the best for translations between
the two SLATS dataset domains. UVCGAN improves CycleGAN by renovating its
generator network and the training procedure. The UVCGAN generator is a hybrid
architecture of a U-Net backbone [30] with a Vision-Transformer (ViT) bottleneck [31].
U-Net is known for its outstanding accuracy in modeling local or short-range patterns
and its application in the segmentation of medical images. However, it may be less
effective at capturing long-range dependencies. Conversely, based on its impressive
performance in image classification [32], ViT excels in capturing long-range dependencies
and semantic relationships within an image. Nevertheless, relying solely on ViT may
be insufficient for addressing the complexity of an image translation task, a regression
problem in nature, as it may struggle to model details. Hence, the hybrid generator
architecture of UVCGAN amalgamates the strengths of convolution-based networks

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 12
and ViT, striking a balance between local and long-range pattern recognition.
3.4. Alternative models for unpaired image translation
Numerous models have been developed for UI2I translation, primarily on non-scientific
image datasets. The models can be categorized based on two perspectives: the DL
paradigm the algorithm is based upon and the way that consistency is enforced. For
example, based on the paradigm, CycleGAN [20], ACL-GAN [22], U-GAT-IT [23],
Council-GAN [33], and UVCGAN [21] are GAN-based methods. CUT [34] adopts the
contrastive learning paradigm. LETIT [35] utilizes the energy transport on the latent
feature space, while EGSDE [24] and ILVR [36] are diffusion-based models. In terms
of consistency enforcement, CycleGAN, ACL-GAN, U-GAT-IT, UVCGAN, and CUT
impose explicit consistency constraints via loss functions, while the other methods do
so implicitly.
Another key feature of UI2I translation algorithms is the use of artificial randomness
in the image generation process. Among the aforementioned models, CycleGAN,
U-GAT-IT, UVCGAN, and CUT are deterministic, while Council-GAN, EGSDE,
and ILVR inject randomness into image generation. Although randomness helps
boost diversity in natural image translation tasks, as there tends to be no single
correct translation corresponding to an input, its application to SLATS is unnecessary.
Specifically, for this study of the idealized SLATS dataset, the map between the
two domains is one-to-one in nature, which makes a deterministic model the more
appropriate choice.
Given the limitation on time and computing resources, we focus on four models that
enforce cycle consistency explicitly because models without explicit cycle consistency
place virtually no constraints on the output and may generate images unrelated to the
input.
4. Evaluation
As part of this work, the performance of the neural translation algorithms CycleGAN,
ACL-GAN, U-GAT-IT, and UVCGAN is evaluated on the paired test set of SLATS.
First, we perform a direct pixel-wise comparison of the translated detector readouts
(ADC waveform images) with their targets. This comparison will indicate the quality of
translation on the raw detector readout level. Second, a signal processing algorithm (see
Appendix D, and [37]) is applied to estimate physically meaningful counts of ionized
electrons (see Section 2) from the raw detector readouts. The signal processing algorithm
is designed to perform accurately on domain A, and it exhibits domain-shift-related
performance degradation when applied to the data from domain B. Using the signal
processing algorithm allows for estimating the degree to which the UI2I translation
algorithms alleviate the domain-shift effects on physically meaningful quantities.
Of note, making CycleGAN, ACL-GAN, U-GAT-IT, and UVCGAN work on the

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 13
Table 1. Translation performance comparison with ℓ1 and ℓ2 differences on
the ADC waveform. The differences are produced with the best performer of each
algorithm. Full results with all HP settings can be found in Appendix Table E1.
A to B B to A
Algorithm ℓ1 ℓ2 ℓ1 ℓ2
CycleGAN 0.074 0 .180 0.061 0 .159
ACL-GAN 0.083 0 .566 0.039 0 .121
U-GAT-IT 0.078 1 .187 0.073 1 .161
UVCGAN 0.030 0 .033 0.025 0 .027
SLATS dataset required several modifications. To explore their potential, we conducted
a small-scale hyperparameter (HP) tuning on each of the algorithms. For simplicity, all
results in this section are produced by the best-performing HP settings of each algorithm.
The details regarding model modification, HP tuning, and training are available in
Appendix B for UVCGAN and in Appendix C for the other three CycleGAN-like models.
4.1. Translation quality evaluated on ADC waveforms
To quantitatively estimate the quality of the ADC waveform translations, we calculate
ℓ1 (mean absolute error) andℓ2 (mean squared error) between the translated and ground
truth images. Table 1 summarizes the best-performing results, while the complete results
for all HP settings can be found in Appendix Table E1.
Two samples from the A→ B translation in Figure 6 and another two from
the B→ A translation in Figure 7 are presented for a qualitative comparison, which
shows all algorithms manage to reproduce the key features of the target domain in the
translations to some extent. The features include more extended tracks and “lobe”
structures at the track tips in the A→ B translation and compactified tracks and
more abrupt track tips in the B→A translation (see Section 2.3). However, there are
several noticeable defects in the translations, such as rugged track edges, large errors in
the track center, missing “lobes” near track tips inA→B translation, and incompletely
reduced track edges in B→A translation. That said, all of the translation algorithms
perform reasonably well in maintaining a strong consistency with the input images.
4.2. Translation quality evaluated on signal processing results
The raw LArTPC detector readouts are represented as ADC waveforms. These
waveforms are difficult to interpret and have no direct relation to the physical properties
of the particles that created them. Therefore, instead of building detector reconstruction
pipelines directly on such waveforms, a signal processing algorithm is run first. The
signal processing algorithm is designed to infer the original, physically meaningful,
distribution of ionized electrons that induced a particular waveform (cf. Section 2).

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 14
▲
▼
▲
CycleGAN ACL-GAN U-GAT-IT UVCGAN
translatedℓ1 difference
A (quasi-1D)B (2D)
▲
▼ ♦
CycleGAN ACL-GAN U-GAT-IT UVCGAN
translatedℓ1 difference
A (quasi-1D)B (2D)
Figure 6. Examples for the A → B translation. Defects appearing in the
translations are marked as: ▼ for rugged track edge,▲ for big error in the core of the
track where the signal is strongest, and ♦ for missing the “lobe” structure near the
track tip.
The recovered distributions of ionized electrons serve as a basis for the downstream
reconstruction algorithms.
The signal processing algorithm involves two main stages: deconvolution of an
ADC readout and high-pass filtering. The deconvolution operation is designed to act
as an inverse of the simulated detector response function. Therefore, it is affected
by the domain shift, as the simulated detector response may differ from the real
detector response. Since signal processing is the first stage of the detector reconstruction
pipelines, its domain shift error is then propagated to downstream algorithms.
The second stage of the signal processing algorithm is high-pass filtering. It is
required since the bipolar nature of the deconvolution operator tends to amplify low-
frequency noise. An adaptive high-pass filter, referred to as the signal region-of-interest
(ROI) selection, is subsequently applied to mitigate the impact of this amplification.
Further details of this algorithm can be found in Appendix D.
In this study, where domainB is used as a proxy to real detector data, we naturally
use the quasi-1D response function to design the signal process procedure and denote

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 15
▼
▲ ▲
CycleGAN ACL-GAN U-GAT-IT UVCGAN
translatedℓ1 difference
A (quasi-1D)B (2D)
♦
♦
▲ ▲ ▲
▲
CycleGAN ACL-GAN U-GAT-IT UVCGAN
translatedℓ1 difference
A (quasi-1D)B (2D)
Figure 7. Examples for the B → A translation. Defects appearing in the
translations are marked as: ▼ for rugged track edge,▲ for big error in the core of the
track where the signal is strongest, and ♦ for incompletely reduced track edges.
the signal processing as ϕA. Because domain A has a matching simulation and signal
processing, the electron countsϕA(a) reconstructed froma∈A should match the ground
truth electron counts (minus the random noise introduced in the signal processing
procedure). On the contrary, because domain B is simulated and signal processed with
different response functions, the electron counts ϕA(b) reconstructed from b∈B will be
less accurate than its counterpart ϕA(a). The difference between ϕA(a) and ϕA(b) is an
indicator of the severity of the domain shift problem. Consequently, the reduction in
the difference resulting from the translation can be viewed as the extent to which the
domain shift problem is mitigated.
To carry out a quantitative study, we randomly sample 1000 pairs of test SLATS
tiles. We calculate the baseline ℓ1 error ∥ϕA(a)−ϕA(b)∥1 and translation ℓ1 error
∥ϕA (GA→B(a))−ϕA(b)∥1 and ∥ϕA (GB→A(b))−ϕA(a)∥1, where GA→B and GB→A are
neural translators. Figure 8B and Figure 9B reveal the statistics.
It is worth noting that because ϕA is designed based on the detector response
function of domain A, only the comparison between ∥ϕA (GB→A(b))−ϕA(a)∥1 and

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 16
a ∈A b ∈BGA→B(a)
ϕA(a) ϕA(b)ϕA(GA→B(a))
ADC
electrons
signal
processing
neural
translation
A. Comparing neural translations with signal processing
baselineCycleGANACL-GANU-GAT-ITUVCGAN
0
5
10
15ℓ1 error
B. ℓ1 on electron count
ϕA(a) ϕA(GA→B(a)) ϕA(b)
Translation add the artifact
Figure 8. Signal processing study for A→ B translation. Panel A features
a diagram of the signal processing study. A tile a from domain A is translated by
the UVCGAN generator GA→B toGA→B(a), which resembles a’s counterpart b from
domain B. To reconstruct the electron count, signal processing ϕA is applied to a,
GA→B(a), and b. We zoom in on an area where ϕA(b) exhibits an artifact. Because
the artifact is absent from ϕA(a), we know it is a result of the mismatch between
the response function and the signal processing procedure. A similar artifact can be
observed in the signal processed translationGA→B(a), which attests to the effectiveness
of the translation. Panel B compares the ℓ1 errors on electron count. Comparing the
result with Table 1 illustrates the translation quality in ADC values correlates strongly
with post-signal processing performance.
the baseline ∥ϕA(a)−ϕA(b)∥1 can be used to infer the extent to which a translation
can reduce the domain-shift effect. However, ∥ϕA (GA→B(a))−ϕA(b)∥1 also is a valid
indicator of the translation efficacy as it measures the translation’s sensitivity in
capturing the inaccuracy resulting from the domain shift.
These comparisons show that translations produced by all algorithms do improve
upon the baseline with UVCGAN being the best performer in both translation
directions. Notably, UVCGAN achieves a greater than 80% reduction inℓ1 error over the
baseline on average for the B→A translation. Comparing the result in Table 1 shows
that the translation quality measured in electron counts correlates strongly with those
featuring ADC values. Additional evaluation of post-signal processing performance is
provided in Appendix E.
For qualitative comparison, the signal-processed results for one sample SLATS tile
are shown in Figure 8A for the A→ B translation and Figure 9A for the B→ A
translation. The translated images in both figures are produced by the best performer,
UVCGAN. Due to the mismatch in response functions, the signal-processed result for a
domainB sample may exhibit artifacts along the periphery of the tracks as exemplified
by the area marked with the blue box. We anticipate an effective A→B translation to
replicate the artifact, while a B→A translation should eliminate it. This expectation

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 17
b ∈B a ∈AGB→A(b)
ϕA(b) ϕA(a)ϕA(GB→A(b))
ADC
electrons
signal
processing
neural
translation
A. Comparing neural translations with signal processing
baselineCycleGANACL-GANU-GAT-ITUVCGAN
0
5
10
15ℓ1 error
B. ℓ1 on electron count
ϕA(b) ϕA(GB→A(b)) ϕA(a)
Translation remove the artifact
Figure 9. Signal processing study for B→ A translation. Panel A depicts a
diagram of the signal processing study. A tile b from domain B is translated by the
UVCGAN generator GB→A to an image GB→A(b), which resembles b’s counterpart
a from domain A. Signal processing ϕA is applied to b, GB→A(b) and a, so the
electron count can be reconstructed. As in Figure 8A, we zoom in on the same area
where ϕA(b) exhibits an artifact. This shows the artifact disappears in the signal
processed translation GB→A(b), which attests to the effectiveness of the translation.
Panel B compares the ℓ1 errors on electron count. Comparing the result with Table 1
demonstrates the translation quality in ADC values correlates strongly with post-signal
processing performance.
aligns with the translations generated by UVCGAN, where the artifact is introduced in
ϕA(GA→B(a)) and is removed in ϕA(GB→A(b)).
Considering the neural translation algorithm is trained in a purely data-driven
fashion, i.e., solely based on the ADC waveform images without any input or constraints
from physics or downstream applications, these are promising results.
4.3. Domain shift mitigation for a supervised learning algorithm
In this section, we investigate the effectiveness of UI2I translation techniques in
mitigating the domain shift problem in a supervised learning context. Specifically,
we design a supervised DL regression model to predict the number of ionized electrons
from an ADC waveform. This model exhibits decreased performance when trained on
domain A and applied to domain B. Then, we test whether the UI2I translations can
alleviate this degradation of the model performance.
The experiment proceeds as follows: we train predictive models—EA,EB, andEG—
to estimate the total count of ionized electrons e in a waveform. Here, G is a neural
translator that translates ADC waveform images from domain A to domain B, such as
CycleGAN, ACL-GAN, U-GAT-IT, and UVCGAN. The models EA, EB, and EG are
trained using waveforms a∈ A, waveforms b∈ B, and translated waveforms GA→B(a)

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 18
for a∈A, respectively.
After training, we evaluate all the models on waveforms from domainB. Due to the
domain shift, we expect that EA will perform worse on B than EB. However, since EG
is trained on translated waveforms that closely resemble those in domain B, we expect
that it will outperform EA when tested on B. We use an AlexNet-like [38] architecture
for the regression model. Further details on the model are provided in Appendix F.
Table 2. Models trained on translated images mitigate the domain shift
problem, as measured by MARE (lower is better). EA, trained on domain A
and applied to domain B, represents the worst-case scenario for domain shift. EB,
trained and tested on domain B, serves as the performance benchmark. The EG
models, trained on waveforms translated by a neural translatorG and tested on domain
B, demonstrate varying degrees of effectiveness in mitigating domain shift through UI2I
translation methods.
EA EB ECycleGAN EACL-GAN EU-GAT-IT EUVCGAN
B 0.390 0 .211 0 .222 0 .223 0 .257 0 .216
Table 2 summarizes the results of the evaluation of the regression models on domain
B. The performance is evaluated with mean absolute relative error (MARE), calculated
as n−1Pn
i=1|(ˆei−ei)/ei|, where ˆei represents the predicted total electron count and n
is the number of test examples.
As expected, EA exhibits the worst performance due to the domain shift. EB
performs the best, as it was trained and tested on data from the same domain. The four
EG models, trained on translated waveforms, show varying degrees of effectiveness in
mitigating the domain shift problem. Notably, EUVCGAN outperforms others, achieving
comparable MARE to EB. This aligns with our earlier findings from the pixel-wise
difference analysis in Section 4.1.
Discussion and future research direction
Findings from this work highlight the potential of UI2I translation algorithms in
addressing the challenges of domain shift in LArTPC data. However, several issues
require attention before these algorithms can be effectively used to translate between
simulated and real detector data.
Scaling UI2I algorithms to work on large images. Existing UI2I translation algorithms
have been developed and tested on images of size (256 , 256). Thus, the same-sized tiles
are used in this study. However, full LArTPC images of size (800 , 6000) are needed
for downstream analyses. In applying the model to tiles and assembling them to form
the full translated image, mismatches did occur along the tile boundaries. Therefore, as
part of our future work, we need to develop network models and computational pipelines
capable of handling full images.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 19
Performing and Evaluating non-deterministic translations. Another crucial aspect is
the one-to-one nature of the translation. In this work, we addressed a problem where the
translation between the two domains is fully deterministic and one-to-one. However, in
real detectors, multiple stochastic processes are present. These stochastic processes will
render the domain map non-deterministic, resulting in either one-to-many or even many-
to-many relationships. The non-determinism of the translation presents two challenges:
1) how to adapt UI2I translation methods to handle non-deterministic mappings, and
2) how to evaluate the quality of non-deterministic translations.
There are multiple ways to make a UI2I translation non-deterministic. ACL-
GAN [22] presents one such approach, replacing a strong cycle-consistency constraint
with a weaker adversarial consistency. The DRIT family of models [39] demonstrates
another method, separating the content (core part of the image that should be preserved)
and the attributes (part of the image that changes during the translation). This
separation allows for substituting multiple attributes for a single translation, resulting
in a variety of output images. BiCycleGAN [40] shows another interesting way to
construct a one-to-many mapping ( A→ B) by adding an extra latent dimension L to
theA domain. Then, it constructs a map (A×L→B) which is a one-to-one map. This
method allows us to obtain a one-to-many translation (A→B) by varying points in the
latent dimensionL. The approaches presented by ACL-GAN, DRIT, and BiCycleGAN
demonstrate that developing one-to-many and many-to-many translations is possible,
indicating a promising direction for future research.
The shift to non-deterministic translations raises a question of how to evaluate the
quality of the translation in a non-deterministic case. In this work, we were able to
construct a paired ground truth evaluation dataset due to the one-to-one nature of the
problem. This exact pairing allowed us to estimate the translation quality directly by
comparing translated images to their ground truths. However, in the case of one-to-
many translation, constructing such a paired evaluation dataset becomes impossible.
Therefore, more sophisticated metrics are required to judge the quality of these non-
deterministic translations.
We believe a robust evaluation protocol should focus on two aspects of the
translation: 1) realism, a neural translator’s ability to replicate the distinctive features
of the target domain during translation, and 2) consistency, its capacity to translate
without altering the underlying physical properties. In non-scientific UI2I translation
tasks, established metrics such as Fr´ echet Inception Distance (FID) [41] and Kernel
Inception Distance (KID) [42] are commonly used to assess realism. However, these
metrics are based on the InceptionV3 network [43] pretrained on the ImageNet
dataset [44], raising doubts about their applicability to scientific datasets. On the other
hand, translation consistency remains a relatively unexplored aspect of UI2I translation
research. The exact definition of consistency in UI2I translation is likely dataset- and
application-dependent. As far as we know, no established metrics or protocols exist
for verifying such consistency, making this a critical area for future research in UI2I
translation for scientific applications.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 20
(Re)evaluation of systematic uncertainties in the presence of UI2I translation. High-
energy physics (HEP) experiments developed complex methods to estimate various
systematic uncertainties affecting the final results (e.g. [45]). Incorporating UI2I
translation into the standard simulation chain may present unique challenges specific
to HEP experiments. These challenges are twofold: 1) estimating the systematic
uncertainty (if any) stemming from the UI2I translation, and 2) understanding how
the UI2I translation affects the already established systematic uncertainties.
While UI2I translation algorithms aim to bring the simulated (A) and experimental
(B) domains closer, they may introduce artifacts into the translation process. These
artifacts could be the source of additional systematic uncertainty, which may need to be
quantified. One possible approach to establishing the magnitude of such uncertainty is
to train an ensemble of UI2I models and analyze the amount of variance introduced
in the experimental results by the ensemble. Alternatively, the UI2I translation
could be treated as a “detector calibration” step, without assigning specific systematic
uncertainties to it. In this case, the uncertainties associated with UI2I would be
incorporated into the uncertainties of other detector simulation parameters.
While UI2I translation techniques show promise in reducing the magnitude of
systematic uncertainties, these reduced uncertainties still require careful evaluation.
This evaluation process may involve a substantial effort to understand how UI2I
translation algorithms interact with established methods of estimating systematic
uncertainties in HEP experiments. Further research is necessary to determine the most
effective approaches for handling UI2I-related uncertainties in HEP experiments.
Conclusion
In this work, we studied the potential of the UI2I translation algorithms to address
the domain shift problem between simulation (domain A) and real data (domain B) in
the LArTPC research. We constructed a surrogate LArTPC problem consisting of two
simulated domains with a systematic difference in the detector response function. This
surrogate problem illustrates the typical source of the systematic uncertainty between
the simulation and real data. The deterministic nature of the detector response function
allowed us to create a paired test dataset with the known ground truths for translations.
We tested four UI2I models (CycleGAN, ACL-GAN, U-GAT-IT, UVCGAN) on the
surrogate LArTPC problem. Our results show that the UI2I methods can successfully
perform the translation of LArTPC events as judged by pixel-wise metrics between the
translation and the corresponding ground truth. Notably, UI2I methods can identify
and preserve the content of each event while translating its appearance. This indicates
the feasibility of the application of the UI2I methods to translate LArTPC data and
improve the realism of the LArTPC simulation.
Furthermore, we tested whether the obtained UI2I translations allow us to reduce
the domain shift error of detector reconstruction algorithms, which are developed on
simulation but applied to real data. For this purpose, we employed a production-

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 21
grade signal processing algorithm designed on simulation (domain A). This algorithm
experiences domain shift error when applied directly on domain B. However, we found
that its domain error can be reduced by up to 80% if we perform a UI2I translation
(B→A) before the application of the signal processing algorithm. These results indicate
that UI2I methods can be used for domain shift reduction in LArTPC analysis.
Among the four tested UI2I models (CycleGAN, ACL-GAN, U-GAT-IT,
UVCGAN), the UVCGAN model achieves the best translation quality and introduces
the fewest artifacts in the translated images. This finding indicates that the UVCGAN
model shows promise as a basis for more complex UI2I algorithms on scientific data. To
promote the reproducibility of our research, we publicly release the SLATS dataset
(https://zenodo.org/record/7809108) and the code used in this study ( https:
//github.com/LS4GAN/uvcgan4slats).
While UI2I methods show promise in reducing the systematic differences between
distinct domains of LArTPC data and help to alleviate the domain shift error of the
signal processing algorithm, there are several issues that remain to be addressed before
their application becomes fully feasible. First, the UI2I methods, currently developed
on images up to 256 pixels in size, need to be scaled to work with larger images of up to
10,000 pixels. Second, our work investigated a problem where the relationship between
two domains is one-to-one. The actual relationship between the LArTPC detector
simulation and real data is many-to-many. The performance of UI2I methods needs
to be studied under many-to-many relationships. Moreover, proper translation quality
metrics need to be developed for the many-to-many case. Finally, while UI2I methods
may reduce the systematic difference between simulated and real data, one still needs
to estimate potential systematic uncertainties introduced by these methods. Likewise,
work needs to be done to ascertain how the inclusion of the UI2I translation into the
detector simulation pipeline may affect other systematic uncertainties. Exploring these
directions will be essential to fully leverage the potential of UI2I methods in LArTPC
research and broader scientific applications.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development
Program of Brookhaven National Laboratory, which is operated and managed for the
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science by Brookhaven Science Associates under
contract No. DE-SC0012704.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 22
[1] Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey. Neurocomputing,
312:135–153, 2018.
[2] Riccardo Miotto, Fei Wang, Shuang Wang, Xiaoqian Jiang, and Joel T Dudley. Deep learning for
healthcare: review, opportunities and challenges. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 19(6):1236–1246,
05 2017.
[3] Seonwoo Min, Byunghan Lee, and Sungroh Yoon. Deep learning in bioinformatics. Briefings in
bioinformatics, 18(5):851–869, 2017.
[4] Nicolae Sapoval, Amirali Aghazadeh, Michael G Nute, Dinler A Antunes, Advait Balaji, Richard
Baraniuk, CJ Barberan, Ruth Dannenfelser, Chen Dun, Mohammadamin Edrisi, et al. Current
progress and open challenges for applying deep learning across the biosciences. Nature
Communications, 13(1):1728, 2022.
[5] Joaquin Quionero-Candela, Masashi Sugiyama, Anton Schwaighofer, and Neil D. Lawrence.
Dataset Shift in Machine Learning . The MIT Press, 2009.
[6] Carla C Takahashi and Antonio P Braga. A review of off-line mode dataset shifts. IEEE
Computational Intelligence Magazine , 15(3):16–27, 2020.
[7] Yuqi Fang, Pew-Thian Yap, Weili Lin, Hongtu Zhu, and Mingxia Liu. Source-free unsupervised
domain adaptation: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00265 , 2022.
[8] Carlo Rubbia. The liquid-argon time projection chamber: a new concept for neutrino detectors.
Technical report, European Organization for Nuclear Research, 1977.
[9] W.J. Willis and V. Radeka. Liquid-argon ionization chambers as total-absorption detectors.
Nuclear Instruments and Methods , 120(2):221–236, 1974.
[10] D. R. Nygren. The Time Projection Chamber: A New 4 pi Detector for Charged Particles. eConf,
C740805:58, 1974.
[11] Roberto Acciarri, C Adams, R An, A Aparicio, S Aponte, J Asaadi, M Auger, N Ayoub, L Bagby,
B Baller, et al. Design and construction of the microboone detector. Journal of Instrumentation,
12(02):P02017, 2017.
[12] B Abi, R Acciarri, MA Acero, M Adamowski, C Adams, DL Adams, P Adamson, M Adinolfi,
Z Ahmad, CH Albright, et al. The single-phase protodune technical design report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.07081, 2017.
[13] B Abi, R Acciarri, MA Acero, M Adamowski, C Adams, D Adams, P Adamson, M Adinolfi,
Z Ahmad, CH Albright, et al. The dune far detector interim design report volume 1: physics,
technology and strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.10334 , 2018.
[14] Gabriela Csurka. Domain adaptation for visual applications: A comprehensive survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1702.05374, 2017.
[15] Garrett Wilson and Diane J Cook. A survey of unsupervised deep domain adaptation. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) , 11(5):1–46, 2020.
[16] Licong Guan and Xue Yuan. Iterative loop learning combining self-training and active learning
for domain adaptive semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13361 , 2023.
[17] Lukas Hoyer, Dengxin Dai, Haoran Wang, and Luc Van Gool. Mic: Masked image consistency
for context-enhanced domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 11721–11732, 2023.
[18] Geoffrey French, Michal Mackiewicz, and Mark Fisher. Self-ensembling for visual domain
adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05208 , 2017.
[19] Ming-Yu Liu, Thomas Breuel, and Jan Kautz. Unsupervised image-to-image translation networks.
Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017.
[20] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image
translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, pages 2223–2232, 2017.
[21] Dmitrii Torbunov, Yi Huang, Haiwang Yu, Jin Huang, Shinjae Yoo, Meifeng Lin, Brett Viren, and
Yihui Ren. Uvcgan: Unet vision transformer cycle-consistent gan for unpaired image-to-image
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02557 , 2022.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 23
[22] Yihao Zhao, Ruihai Wu, and Hao Dong. Unpaired image-to-image translation using adversarial
consistency loss. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 800–815. Springer, 2020.
[23] Junho Kim, Minjae Kim, Hyeonwoo Kang, and Kwanghee Lee. U-gat-it: Unsupervised generative
attentional networks with adaptive layer-instance normalization for image-to-image translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.10830 , 2019.
[24] Min Zhao, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Egsde: Unpaired image-to-image translation
via energy-guided stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.06635 , 2022.
[25] R. Acciarri et al. Design and construction of the microboone detector. JINST, 12(02):P02017,
2017.
[26] B. Abi et al. The single-phase protodune technical design report, 2017.
[27] B. Abi et al. First results on protodune-sp liquid argon time projection chamber performance
from a beam test at the cern neutrino platform. Journal of Instrumentation , 15(12):P12004,
dec 2020.
[28] S. Ramo. Currents induced by electron motion. Proceedings of the IRE, 27(9):584–585, 1939.
[29] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
[30] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and
computer-assisted intervention, pages 234–241. Springer, 2015.
[31] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
[32] Ivan Anokhin, Kirill Demochkin, Taras Khakhulin, Gleb Sterkin, Victor Lempitsky, and Denis
Korzhenkov. Image generators with conditionally-independent pixel synthesis. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 14278–14287,
2021.
[33] Ori Nizan and Ayellet Tal. Breaking the cycle-colleagues are all you need. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7860–7869, 2020.
[34] Taesung Park, Alexei A Efros, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Contrastive learning for
unpaired image-to-image translation. In European conference on computer vision , pages 319–
345. Springer, 2020.
[35] Yang Zhao and Changyou Chen. Unpaired image-to-image translation via latent energy transport.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages
16418–16427, 2021.
[36] Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon.
Ilvr: Conditioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.02938, 2021.
[37] C. Adams et al. Ionization electron signal processing in single phase LArTPCs. part i.
algorithm description and quantitative evaluation with MicroBooNE simulation. Journal of
Instrumentation, 13(07):P07006–P07006, jul 2018.
[38] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks. In F. Pereira, C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, and K.Q. Weinberger,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 25. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2012.
[39] Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Jia-Bin Huang, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diverse
image-to-image translation via disentangled representations. In Proceedings of the European
conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 35–51, 2018.
[40] Jun-Yan Zhu, Richard Zhang, Deepak Pathak, Trevor Darrell, Alexei A Efros, Oliver Wang, and
Eli Shechtman. Toward multimodal image-to-image translation. Advances in neural information

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 24
processing systems, 30, 2017.
[41] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances
in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017.
[42] Miko laj Bi´ nkowski, Danica J Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. Demystifying mmd
gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01401 , 2018.
[43] Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jonathon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna.
Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision. CoRR, abs/1512.00567, 2015.
[44] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual
recognition challenge. International journal of computer vision , 115:211–252, 2015.
[45] P Abratenko, R An, J Anthony, L Arellano, J Asaadi, A Ashkenazi, S Balasubramanian, B Baller,
C Barnes, G Barr, et al. Search for an anomalous excess of inclusive charged-current ν e
interactions in the microboone experiment using wire-cell reconstruction. Physical Review D ,
105(11):112005, 2022.
[46] X. Qian, C. Zhang, B. Viren, and M. Diwan. Three-dimensional imaging for large LArTPCs.
Journal of Instrumentation , 13(05):P05032–P05032, may 2018.
[47] Wire-Cell Team. Wire-Cell Toolkit. https://wirecell.bnl.gov/, 2023. [Online; accessed 06-
Feb-2023].
[48] Yichen Li, Thomas Tsang, Craig Thorn, Xin Qian, Milind Diwan, Jyoti Joshi, Steve Kettell,
William Morse, Triveni Rao, James Stewart, Wei Tang, and Brett Viren. Measurement of
longitudinal electron diffusion in liquid argon. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 816:160–
170, 2016.
[49] P. Cennini et al. Performance of a three-ton liquid argon time projection chamber. Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors
and Associated Equipment, 345(2):230–243, 1994.
[50] Rob Veenhof. Garfield, recent developments, 1998.
[51] C. Adams et al. Ionization electron signal processing in single phase LArTPCs. part II.
data/simulation comparison and performance in MicroBooNE. Journal of Instrumentation ,
13(07):P07007–P07007, jul 2018.
Appendix A. More details concerning the Simple Liquid-Argon Track
Samples (SLATS) dataset
Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber (LArTPC) detectors enclose a volume of liquid
argon. As illustrated in Figure 2 in the main text, energetic charged particles traversing
the volume will ionize electrons from nearby argon atoms. Once these electrons are
freed, they are made to drift to the readout side of the detector due to an applied
uniform electric field. A LArTPC detector readout is composed of several Anode
Plane Assemblies (APAs). Each APA contains three sensitive wire planes. Each wire
plane consists of an array of uniformly spaced parallel wires oriented at a unique angle.
Electrons drift past the first two wire planes and are collected on the last wire plane.
In this process, they induce electric current [28] in all nearby wires. These currents are
amplified, and the induced current waveforms are digitized to produce the Analog-to-
Digital Converter (ADC) waveform images.
The two-dimensional (2D) ADC waveform image from each wire plane provides a
unique tomographic view of the distribution of ionized electrons. The horizontal axis of

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 25
this image is the waveform sample time dimension, while the vertical axis is the wire
channel dimension. The pixel value of this image is the ADC value after the per-wire
median ADC value has been subtracted.
Appendix A.1. Idealization and simulated responses for SLATS
A fully realistic simulation requires a long chain of models for the following components:
1) the initial flux of neutrinos or other particles of interest; 2) the interaction cross
sections, nuclear transport, and final state particle tracking through the volume; 3)
the production and drift of ionization electrons; 4) the induction in the sensitive wire
electrodes; and 5) the final effects of electronic amplification and digitization.
The models up to the production of ionized electrons form the first stage of the
simulation, which encodes our understanding of particle physics. The remaining models
form the second stage of the simulation, which encodes our understanding of detector
physics. In constructing the SLATS dataset, the difference between the two domains is
designed to be caused by applying different detector response functions in the second
stage. However, with the full simulation model chain, the resulting topology of ionized
electron tracks is intricate. This intricacy can complicate the interpretation of subtle
variations resulting from different detector response functions.
To avoid this complication and simplify the software processing chain required to
produce the SLATS dataset, the full particle physics model chain (first stage) is replaced
with a simplified, ideal-track model. This ideal-track model begins with the production
of straight-line tracks randomly distributed in space and direction throughout the
detector volume. Each track is made to ionize electrons at a rate corresponding to
a minimum-ionizing muon. The result mimics the activity of cosmic muons traversing
the detector.
After the simplified first stage, the latter stage employs the full detector physics
model as implemented by the Wire-Cell toolkit [46, 47] with an additional simplification
that electronics noise (otherwise inescapable) is omitted. Though artificial, this choice
allows for a focus on systematic differences due to disparate detector response functions.
The Wire-Cell toolkit software provides current state-of-the-art LArTPC detector
simulation and signal processing and is used by most LArTPC experiments and
prototype detectors either under construction or in operation today. The simulation
components apply the effects of electron diffusion and absorption while transporting
the ionization electrons through a uniform drift field in the bulk of the detector
volume [48, 49]. Near the wire planes, ionization electrons are drifted through a far
more complex electric field governed by the locations, sizes, and applied voltages of the
sense wires. This detailed drift field and the associated Ramo weight fields [28] are
provided to the toolkit as input. Here, we use fields calculated by the GARFIELD [50]
software package via a 2D model [37] of the detector electrode arrays.
As illustrated in Figure 3 in the main text, the SLATS dataset’s two domains are
made unique by the diverse nature of these fields (quasi-one dimensional (1D) versus

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 26
2D). This work defines samples in domainB as being produced with the aforementioned
full 2D response function. On the other hand, samples from domain A are produced
with a related yet different response function. The response function is obtained by
masking the 2D response so that all contributions from regions near neighboring wires
are removed. Comparing the illustration of the quasi-1D response with the 2D one in
Figure 3B shows the quasi-1D response still is 2D in the remaining narrow region near
the central wire, which explains the term “quasi” in the name.
Finally, after the electric current response, an electronics response and digitization
model (linear scaling and truncation to 12-bit integer) are applied. The final output
from the simulation is the ADC waveform images that serve as the input to neural
translators after passing through a few preprocessing steps.
Appendix A.2. Data generation and preprocessing
To generate the SLATS dataset, the simulation runs produced 10010 events, each with
10 ideal line sources at the minimum-ionization energy equivalent for muons. Each event
results in a 2D ADC waveform image for each wire plane. This work focuses only on the
U plane, the first one the electrons encounter during their drift. The simulation employs
a model of the ProtoDUNE-SP [27] detector, which has six APAs at the readout. Hence,
across the entire detector, the simulation produced a total of 60060 U-plane images.
The image from the U plane is 800 pixels in height and 6000 pixels in width.
The image height spans the electronics readout channels and provides a transverse
tomographic view at a given time. The width denotes these samples over time.
From each full readout image of shape (800 , 6000), we take a center crop of shape
(768, 5888). The center crop shape is chosen so it can be divided into tiles of shape
(256, 256), which typically are used as input to a neural translator.
In the conventional practice of analyzing LArTPC readout images, it is common to
apply similar center crops for various reasons, such as removing activity from background
interactions originating outside the detector or providing a size more optimal for fast-
Fourier transforms. Nevertheless, future work will investigate how to avoid this loss of
information at the edge of the readout image.
In some instances, the randomness of placing 10 ideal particles across the entire
detector leads to one or more of the six APAs containing no ionization electrons. The
resulting “empty” center crops of readout images are neglected, leaving 56 , 253 non-
empty center crops (93 .7%). From these non-empty center crops, 55 , 253 crops are
reserved for training and 1, 000 for testing.
Similarly, the sparseness of activity leads to a majority of 256×256 tiles being fully
or nearly empty. We choose a threshold of 200 pixels around the first local minimum of
the distribution for domain A. To keep the tiles paired, we drop a pair if either domain
A tile or its domain B counterpart falls below the set threshold. After filtering, we have
1, 065, 870 tile pairs for training and 18 , 887 for testing.
Of note, although the training dataset is paired, the UI2I translation training

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 27
procedures shuffle both domains of the training dataset independently. Shuffling breaks
the pairing, making the UI2I translation algorithms unable to benefit from the fact that
the original dataset was paired.
Appendix B. UVCGAN pretraining and training
The UVCGAN model used for SLATS is identical to the one described in [21] except
for three minor modifications: 1) reducing the number of input/output channels to 1,
2) removing all the normalization layers in the convolution blocks, and 3) removing the
output sigmoid activation from the generators.
Training the UVCGAN model on the SLATS dataset consists of two stages: self-
supervised pretraining and translation training. Although it is common practice to start
the translation training directly with randomly initialized generators, there is evidence
showing that initializing the generators by pretraining them on a simpler task provides
an advantage over random initialization [21]. This study uses an image inpainting task
to pretrain the generators. First, each SLATS tile is subdivided into a grid of patches
of size (32, 32). Then, each patch is randomly masked by zeros with a probability of
.4. The generators are pretrained to recover the masked regions, allowing them to learn
nontrivial dependencies between different parts of a SLATS image.
Here, both generators are pretrained for 16 , 384, 000 iterations on the image
inpainting task, configured similarly to [21]. A smaller learning rate of 6 .25× 10−6 is
used because SLATS data have a larger range compared to natural images. Nonetheless,
generators pretrained with this method failed to recover the full width of the tracks.
Instead, they fill masked regions with very narrow tracks. We speculate this happens
because pixel values away from the track cores are quite small compared to those near the
cores. Therefore, their proper reconstruction gives a small benefit in terms of the ℓ2 loss.
On the other hand, before the network learns to reconstruct these small-valued pixels
properly, it is going to make many mistakes, which are costly in terms of the ℓ2 loss.
The high cost of the mistakes compared to the small benefit of proper reconstruction
creates a potential barrier to learning the full width of the tracks.
To lessen that learning barrier, we modify the ℓ2 loss function and reduce the
penalty for the network to overwrite zeros incorrectly by α. More precisely, let y be an
image from either domain A or B and ˆy be the inpainting output. The reconstruction
loss then is defined as follows:
Lreco (ˆy,y ) =
α·P
yi,j=0 ˆy2
i,j +P
yi,j̸=0 (ˆyi,j−yi,j)2
H×W , (B.1)
whereH andW are the image height and width. During pertaining, we keep α at 0 for
the first 819, 200 iterations, allowing the network to freely overwrite the empty space
without penalty. Then, we linearly anneal α to 1 during the subsequent 2 , 457, 600
iterations. When α = 1, the loss function in Equation (B.1) reduces to the normal ℓ2
and is kept that way until the end of pretraining. An ablation study shows the modified
ℓ2 loss expedited learning of the reconstruction of small-valued pixels. The generators

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 28
trained with the modified ℓ2 loss also achieve a ∼ 10% lower reconstruction error than
generators trained with the normal ℓ2.
The translation on the SLATS dataset was trained for 200 epochs with 5000
randomly selected tiles per epoch (10 6 iterations in total). We note that using slightly
unequal initial learning rates for the generators (10−5) and the discriminators (5×10−5)
improves performance. The learning rates are kept constant for the first 100 epochs and
linearly annealed to zero during the second 100 epochs.
We also perform a hyperparameter (HP) optimization on coefficients of cycle-
consistency loss, λa and λb, and the discriminator gradient penalty parameters, λGP
andγ. The evaluation results presented in the work have been produced using the best
model found in the optimization with λa =λb = 1, λGP = 1, and γ = 10. Identity loss
also is used for translation training with coefficients kept at half of λa and λb. A more
detailed discussion about loss coefficients and gradient penalty can be found in [21].
Appendix C. Modification and hyperparameter tuning for other
CycleGAN-like models
This work required model modification and HP tuning of three other CycleGAN-like
UI2I translation algorithms: CycleGAN [20], ACL-GAN [22], and U-GAT-IT [23].
Because all three algorithms originally were designed for photographic image translation,
they use tanh at the final layer to limit the pixel value within [ −1, 1]. To adapt the
models for the integer-valued SLATS data, the final tanh activations are removed.
For CycleGAN, we conduct a grid search on two key HP values: generator
architecture and the coefficient for the cycle consistency loss. We evaluate the ResNet
generator with nine blocks and the U-Net generator with size 256 input. We chose three
cycle-consistency loss coefficient levels: 1, 5, and 10 (default). As CycleGAN trains
both generators jointly, we train six models (in total), one for each generator type and
cycle consistency level. For each model, we train on 5000 images (with batch size 4) for
200 epochs, which means a total of one million images are used for training.
For ACL-GAN, we employ three HP settings, one for each of the three unpaired
translation tasks (selfie-to-anime, male-to-female, and eye-glasses removal) studied
in [22]. Because ACL-GAN does not train translations in both directions jointly, we
train a total of six models, one for each translation direction and HP setting. Each
model is trained with a batch size of 4 for 250000 iterations. Again, a total of one million
images are used for training. ACL-GAN can generate a variable number of outputs, each
with a randomly generated style. To compare directly with other algorithms, we have
generated only one output and used 1 for the random seed.
For U-GAT-IT, we tune the cycle-consistency loss coefficient ( λcyc) at three
levels: 1, 5, and 10 (default). Following the U-GAT-IT default, we retain the identity
consistency loss coefficients equal to those for the cycle consistency. Because U-GAT-IT
also trains both translation directions jointly, we train three models (in total). Each
model is trained with a batch size of 4 for 250000 iterations, so one million total images

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 29
are used for training.
Appendix D. More details regarding signal processing
As detailed in Appendix A, the LArTPC detects particles by recording ionization
electrons produced along the particles’ trajectories. These electron counts serve as the
basis for deriving various parameters of the original particles, including momentum and
mass. It is important to note that the LArTPC readout, represented as ADC waveforms,
does not directly provide the electron counts. Instead, it captures the digitized electric
current they induce on the APA wires.
In practice, the bipolar nature of LArTPC ADC waveforms obscures an accurate
and precise measurement of the underlying distribution of ionization electrons. To reveal
this distribution so physically meaningful parameters about the original particles can
be reconstructed (e.g., their momentum and mass), a procedure generically called signal
processing is applied.
Briefly, signal processing has two stages: deconvolution and high-pass filtering.
First, it performs a deconvolution of an ADC readout image with a model of the same
detector response used in the simulation but averaged over each region near a wire.
The bipolar nature of the response inevitably causes the deconvolution to amplify low-
frequency noise. To counter that, the second stage applies an adaptive high-pass filter
known as signal region-of-interest (ROI) selection.
Due to the inevitable amplification of noise, signal processing is designed to contend
with realistic detector noise by applying various filters. The interplay of the input noise,
filters, and thresholds to define ROI makes signal processing especially sensitive to the
presence of noise or the lack thereof. The absence of noise in the SLATS dataset causes
the signal processing algorithm to fail. Thus, post-processing of the noise-free SLATS
ADC waveforms is performed to add a realistic noise component. To do this, we linearly
scale ADC pixel values to be consistent with the voltage levels originally produced by the
amplifiers in the electronics prior to digitization. We then add noise generated from a
model that has been previously developed to match observations of LArTPC detectors.
Finally, we rescale (re-digitize) the result back to ADC levels, and the signal processing
can then be correctly applied.
Please refer to [37, 51] for a more in-depth understanding of the signal processing
procedure.
Appendix E. More evaluation of translation quality
Here, we provide two additional evaluations of the translation quality. First, Table E1
depicts the ℓ1 and ℓ2 errors on ADC values for all HP settings discussed in Appendix
C. The best performers for each algorithm are highlighted.
Second, we evaluate signal processing results with pixel-wise percentage difference
(PD). PD is especially useful for post-signal processing translation quality evaluation

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 30
Table E1. Translation quality on ADC waveforms is evaluated in terms of ℓ1 and ℓ2
errors.
A to B B to A
algorithm HP variant ℓ1 ℓ2 ℓ1 ℓ2
CycleGAN
(ResNet, 1) 0.266 6 .123 0.202 5 .180
(ResNet, 5) 0.171 2 .947 0.235 5 .449
(ResNet, 10) 0.147 2 .469 0.322 10 .451
(UNet, 1) 0.089 0 .177 0.056 0 .114
(UNet, 5) 0.078 0 .178 0.062 0 .147
(UNet, 10) 0.074 0.180 0.061 0.159
ACL-GAN
anime HP 0.219 5 .476 0.180 5 .188
gender HP 0.079 0 .727 0.065 0 .330
glasses HP 0.083 0.566 0.039 0.121
U-GAT-IT
λcyc = 1 0.086 1 .367 0.069 0 .997
λcyc = 5 0.078 1.187 0.073 1.161
λcyc = 10 0.079 1 .404 0.075 1 .217
UVCGAN 0.030 0 .033 0.025 0 .027
Table E2. Translation quality on electron counts obtained from applying a signal
processing procedure is evaluated in terms of mean absolute percentage difference (%).
A to B B to A
baseline 1.904
CycleGAN 1.220 0.735
ACL-GAN 1.014 0.582
U-GAT-IT 0.998 0.713
UVCGAN 0.549 0.391
because the electron count distribution has a much broader range than ADC values
along with a long heavy tail. Mathematically, for two scalars x, ¯x≥ 0,
PD(x, ¯x) =
(
¯x−x
(¯x+x)/2× 100% if ¯x +x> 0,
0 if ¯ x +x = 0,
and the mean absolute PD between two tensors is defined as the average of the absolute
value of entry-wise PDs.
Table E2 shows the mean absolute PD averaged over 1000 randomly selected test
examples from SLATS. Denote the signal processing procedure as ϕ and let a∈A and
b∈B bea’s counterpart. The baseline is defined as the mean absolute PD between ϕ(a)

=== PAGE BREAK ===

UI2I translation to Mitigate Domain Shift in LArTPC Detector Responses 31
andϕ(b). For a UI2I translation algorithm, we calculate the mean absolute PD between
ϕ (GA→B(a))) and ϕ(b) for A→ B translation and between ϕ (GB→A(b))) and ϕ(a) for
theB→A translation. Table E2 indicates all neural translators offer an improvement
over the baseline with those translations produced by UVCGAN achieving the best
performance.
Appendix F. Training details of the electron-count estimator E
We designed the electron count predictorE with the following architecture. The neural
network consists of 5 convolutional blocks followed by 2 linear blocks. Each convolutional
block includes a convolutional layer with a kernel size of 3 and padding of 1, followed by
a leaky rectified linear unit (Leaky ReLU) activation function and an average pooling
layer that halves the spatial dimensions (width and height). The first convolutional layer
has 1 input channel and 16 output channels. In the subsequent convolutional layers, the
number of output channels doubles with each block until it reaches 64. The output of
the convolutional blocks is then flattened before being passed through the linear blocks.
Each linear block starts with a dropout layer with a probability of 0 .2, followed by
a linear layer and an activation function. The Leaky ReLU activation is used for the
first linear block, while the identity activation is used for the final output. The first
linear layer transforms the 8 × 8× 64 = 4096 input features into 128 output features,
and the second linear layer maps these 128 features to a single output.
To ensure a fair comparison across different predictors, we initialized all models
using a random number generator with seed 2024. Each model was trained for 500
epochs with a batch size of 4, utilizing 80% of the 1000 samples from Section 4.2 for
training and the remaining 20% for testing. The learning rate was initially set to 0.0001
and was reduced by a factor of 0 .95 every 10 epochs. We used the mean absolute error
(ℓ1) as the loss criterion and optimized the models using the AdamW optimizer with
parameters β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, and a weight decay of 0.01.